101 things to do with .RLE(But did not know what .RLE was!) By Chrisdos CBIG Sig Sysop    [76703,717](c) 1986 by Chrisdos. All rights reserved.RLE - Run Lenght Encoding.	A method of encoding HiResolution bit mapped images so as to make itpossible to up and download the image to different brands of computers.	There are a number of computers that can decode .RLE images, andprograms for others are being developed. All that is required is thatthe computer have a HiRes screen of at least 256 pixels wide by 192 down..RLE images are in black and white, so color is not important. This providesfor compatability on a wide range of machines.	The largest use of .RLE images at this point in time seems to beon Commodore 64s, then TRS80 Color Computers, and others. There was, untillrecently, no software avalible for most machines to produce an .RLE image, butthis too is quickly being rectified.	I will cover some basics of .RLE here, refering to Commodore 64programs mostly as that as the computer I use most. I am sure that other computers will have programs that do the same things avalible.	RLE and Compuserve	------------------	.RLE was first used to produce the HiRes weather maps (GO AWX-4) andlater for the CB Users Pictres (GO CB-65) and FBI 10 Most Wanted list (GO TEN)and other images. The first decoding programs were for off line viewing onmost computers, untill the various VIDTEX programs could be updated todo the graphics.	When viewed off line, the .RLE data was captured in a ram buffer andsaved to disk, to be processed later by a displayer program. This was a bitround-a-bout to say the least. I believe VIDTEX for the COCO was the first tobe able to display the .RLE images. Then came CBterm/C64 for the Commodore 64.(CBterm is avalible in DL2 of the CBIG SIG, GO CBIG) Then VIDTEX 4.2 alsofor the Commodore. There are also display programs, both for sale and publicfor just about all the other popular computers.	All the original images were provided by Compuserve, as there werereally no other programs to produce the .RLE information, and as such, therewere no databases of .RLE files to get at, you had to READ the image, youcould not really get to the file to, say, download it. But as programs becameavalible to produce your own .RLE images, users began to upload them to Forumdatabases, where that could either be READ or DOWNLOADED. One of the firstsuch programs for the C64 was HR2RLE. (Avalible in DL2 of CBIG.) With thisprogram, users could convert their own pictures and upload them to share withothers. Of course, a corrisponding RLE2HR program was provided to check the.RLE file produced to see what the image would look like in this format.Again, programs for other compters are avalible now, or soon will be.	Now viewing the files is fairly eazy, but where do you get the originalpictures to convert?? Well, on the C64 there are 2 main formats used mostoften for hires images, this is Doodle and Koala. Almost all Doodle Imagescan be translated directly to .RLE format. Koala take a little more work,as it is a multicolor image, and some of the color must be converted toblack and white to get a good image. (Programs to do all kinds of conversionsare avalible in DL2 of CBIG. Do a BRO /KEY KOALA or BRO /KEY DOODLE)So if you had an image you drew, you can usally find a program that willget it into .RLE format. Not to be left out, some people use video digitizersto produce an image, and then convert that.There are even programs that will take images drawn on other compters anddirectly translate it into a file compatable with your computer, that you canthen translate into .RLE that is even more compatable with other compters.(See COCO64 in DL2 CBIG) And if that were not enugh, programs are even beingcreated to convert all the old ASCII Line Printer Art files into High Resolutionscreen images. (LPT2HR, et al.) When things are done right, a program also will reverse what it has done so it can convert in the oppisite direction as well. All this leads back to the .RLE file again, once an image is convertedto the .RLE file, it can be uploaded to a Forums database,  there it caneither be Downloaded, if you wish to work on it off line, or READ if yourterminal program will display the image directly. 	A .RLE image ir composed of a control character header, that tells theterminal program what type of file follows (for there is also MEDIUM resoltion)and then a string of ASCII characters, each one representing the number ofpixels to set or not. At the end is another control string to turn graphicsoff on your computer.   .RLE is relitivily easy to decode, and there is a primer on doing it on your compter in basic to be found in dl2 of CBIG. Ifa display program does not already exsist for your machine, this is the placeto start in writing your own. More .RLE information can also be had by doinga GO VIDTEX and reading the tech library there.	So now that you have created or downloaded a .RLE file and havedisplayed it, what good is it? Well most programs should allow you to dump theimage to a printer or disk. If you can dump to disk, it is usally in oneof 2 ways. You save the .RLE data itself, or you save the hiRes screen ina usable format. On  a CoCo, the screen is saved in a BIN dump format most often, that can be redisplayed easyly. On a C64, depending on the programinvolved, images can be saved in Doodle or Koala format, and used by theseprograms, or other utilities. Again, other program exsist for other machines,are are at least in the works. (See the file CBTERM.TXT in dl2 of CBIG fora full index to CBterm and RLE conversion programs for the C64 compter. Alsothere are programs for other computers as well. If you know of a .RLE programI dont have, pleae upload it there.)An example of a .RLE save would be VIDTEX 4.2 for the C64, it does not save thescreen, but records the RLE data in its RAM buffer, and will save that todisk. Then it can be reloaded into VIDTEX from disk, and redisplayed. Anoverlay utility has been written for Vidtexx 4.2 that will allow directsaving of the HiRes screen, and this is a more usefull item and you cansave in a format compatable with drawing programs. (VTXDD2 and VTXKO2)	Now, printing the image is what its all about isn't it?It's nice to view the image, but its better to print it for later display.This assumes you have a printer of course, and it is capable of doingHiRes graphics. Some terminal/display programs allow for direct online dumpingof the HiRes screen (CBterm/c64 for example) while others reqire youto save the image to disk and print it with another program. Either way, thereare programs that will allow this on most machines.(Or at least being worked on, Check with the SYSOP of your machines' Forum.)The latest advent in printing, is for those users that do not have a printerthat can do HiRes graphics directly, and that is a program that will producean ASCII line printer file directly from a HiResolution screen. This filecan be printer on any printer then. So things have come full circle !As I stated, programs are being developed to do new things with .RLE graphicson most computers. As a byproduct, communications and utility programs are alsobeing improved.  .RLE was made to be compatible with a wide variety of machines,and the list is growing each day.There is no end to .RLE graphics, what started at a means of showing off theWeather Radar Maps has grown into huge picture and program Data Libraries!For more help with programs for your brand of computer, contact the SYSOPof your machine's Forum or BROwse the various Data Libraries on CompuServewith   bro *.rle     You never know what you may find there. -Chrisdos CBIG Sysop